When p-value is used it's because you are attempting to test a hypothesis of 
some sort. So let's first define a hypothesis. At its simplest, a hypothesis is 
an attempt to explain some observation (generally by linking it to other observations). 
To keep things simple, let's say that you have observed that every time a cat 
gives birth, you've also observed that the babies have been kittens. You therefore 
attempt to explain this with the following hypothesis: "When a cat gives birth, 
the resultant offspring will be kittens." We'll call this "H1" for hypothesis number 1.
 
Now, in statistics (and by extension, science in general) there is never just one 
hypothesis. There is your hypothesis AND there's something called the Null Hypothesis. 
The Null Hypothesis states that there is actually no relationship between the 
observations you're trying to link. In our example, the Null Hypothesis would state: 
"There is no relationship between pregnant cats and kittens." We'll call this "H0" for 
hypothesis number 0 or, null hypothesis.
 
But what's the point of having a null hypothesis?
 
Aside from math (as far as I know) nothing we know about the universe is absolute. 
All that we know is based on observation, and since we can't observe everything that 
there is, we can't say with complete certainty that any explanation of an observation 
is "true." However, we can say that any given hypothesis has a higher or lower probability 
of being true than other hypotheses. Through beating as many alternative explanations 
as possible, we can increase our confidence that our successful explanation is 
true....but we can't ever say that it is 100% true. This is called inductive reasoning 
and it is the basis for all that we think we know about the universe.
 
Back to our example of pregnant cats and kittens. Because we understand the limitations 
of inductive reasoning, we know that we can't ever prove 100% that a pregnant cat 
will always give birth to kittens (maybe on some far away planet cats give birth 
only to snakes). However, we can at least show that our hypothesis (H1) has a higher 
probability of being true than the null hypothesis (H0). In other words, we can 
say that there is a high probability that there is at least some relationship between 
pregnant cats and kittens.
 
So, we start tracking every cat birth that we possibly can. Each time a cat gives 
birth we mark down whether the offspring is a kitten or something else. Once we 
have a good size of observations, we run the result through a statistic called "p-value" 
or "calculated probability." The number that comes out at the end is the probability 
of getting the same results if the null hypothesis is true.
 
In our example, let's say we observed 100 pregnant cats. All 1,000 births resulted 
in kittens. No snakes, no turtles, no balls of anti-matter. Just kittens. Rather 
than doing all the math we'll just say that our resulting p-value is 0.01. This means 
that there is a 1% chance that all 100 pregnant cats gave birth to kittens and yet 
there's actually no relationship between the two. The p-value doesn't say that your 
hypothesis is correct, and it doesn't say the null hypothesis is incorrect. The p-value 
merely states the probability that you could get the same results as you observed 
due to random chance.
 
Typically in science we consider a p-value of 0.05 to be significant. Meaning that 
unless the probability of getting the same results due to random chance is 5% or less, 
we generally don't pursue the alternate hypothesis and instead either continue looking 
for something better or stick with the null hypothesis: the observations are unrelated.